so I hope we can... my plan is to finish this today
and then we'll go into the more concrete details now that you've got some sense of the way that a narrative like this can unfold
if you remember, we were just leaving this terrible little bar, which I think was called the Red Lobster
something like that; where the fox and the cat had met the coachman
and the Coachman is obviously someone who takes you somewhere, he takes you on a trip
and the coachman basically revealed himself, first he kinda looks like a, I guess a somewhat jolly old man
although his expression doesn't precisely read as jolly
and then he reveals himself as something positively satanic
and that's enough to terrify these two-bit thugs, the Fox and the Cat
who think they're tough, but really aren't tough at all
and so they see at some point what they're really tangled up in
and I think I mentioned to you that that was something akin... Jung had this idea that people's shadows reach all the way down to hell
which is actually a very frightening concept, and what he meant by that is
if you take a look at the impulses that drive you that are actually malevolent, if you can admit to such impulses
that if you basically follow those all the way down to their origin, you can find some very nasty things
and what you find down there basically is what allies you with people who've done terrible things
and that's not a very pleasant experience, I would say
although one thing that's worth thinking about is that it is something that can protect you against being very very badly hurt
because one of the things that characterizes people who develop post-traumatic stress disorder
is that they're often naive, and then they encounter something that's really not within their framework of thinking
and it's usually something bad, and because there isn't anything in their philosophy, their way of looking at the world
that has prepared them for that, they end up fragmented and devastated
it's actually protective to you if you can figure out what your full range of capabilities is
because that can help you understand other people a lot better, and to be wiser and more careful in your actions
it's also useful, I think, if you want to convince yourself to act properly
because if you regard yourself as harmless, which is a big mistake, then nothing you can do is really that bad
right? because you're harmless, after all; but if you understand that you're seriously not harmless
then that can make you a lot more careful with yourself
and I would say that's especially true maybe when you're dealing... when you have kids, and you start dealing with your kids
if you know that... what you're capable of, because you're human
then that can motivate you to be much more careful with what you say and do
and I don't mean cautious, I don't mean timid, I don't mean any of that
I just mean that you wanna keep things pristine between you and your children, let's say
because that way they're on your good side, and you want them on your good side
because children who get on their parents' bad side suffer very badly for it, and sometimes it's because they're literally abused
but more often it's because they get, well they get abused, let's say, or neglected, in  much more subtle ways
and you're definitely capable of that, I mean, all you have to do is think about the way you've interacted
with someone that you've decided to not like, or maybe someone you genuinely don't like
and that can range from just not paying any attention to them, especially if they're doing something good
to really pursuing them, and making their life miserable, and you can certainly do that with your family members
and you can do that with your intimate partners, and you can do that with your friends, and you can do it with yourself
so it's really worth knowing that, so... well...
the Fox thinks he's a royal rule breaker, but he's really just a two-bit thug, and this is where he learns that
so... sorry, I have a new phone, and I'm kind of stupid with it, still
so...
well, hypothetically that would work, probably won't
anyways, the Coachman's got these guys in his grasp now, regardless
partly because they're already down this road, and they can't back off, and partly 'cause he also offers them more money than they've seen before
so as bad as they are, they're going to get worse... many of you, I presume, have seen Breaking Bad
that's a really good example of the incorporation, at least in part, or maybe the possession by the shadow from a Jungian perspective
right, because you have this ordinary high school teacher who really thinks that he's an axe [?] and his family as well
you know, like your typical persona, roughly speaking, he's just a normal guy
but part of the reason that he's a normal guy is 'cause he actually hasn't been put in abnormal circumstances
and then all of a sudden he is, and he has a genuine moral conundrum, right, he's gonna die of lung cancer
and he has a son who's got a lot of health problems
and he's terrified that he's going to leave his wife and his child behind with nothing
and then of course as the story... and so he decides to do something that... temporarily... that he regards as... that he would normally regard as reprehensible
and of course he just gets tangled up in that, but then, as the story unfolds, you see that there's... it's more complicated
because it's not that he was just innocent good guy, and he decided to turn bad, he's also very resentful
and angry, and it's partly because he's a bit of a pushover at the beginning, or maybe more than a bit of a pushover
and also that he didn't really fulfill his own potential, and that, you know
he had friends who walked down the entrepreneurial path and maybe they weren't quite fair to him, but whatever
he ends up not very successful as a high school teacher, so he's really angry about that, and so
there's more motivation for him opening up the door to the terrible elements of his personality
than just the fact that he's got good motivations to do so
and that unfolds, so you see the warps and twists in his resentful character
increasingly manifest themselves as he walks down this road to, really, total brutality, and it's quite good
there's a book called "Ordinary Men" that's a lot like that
I don't think I've mentioned that to you before, but "Ordinary Men" is a book about... it's the best book of its type
maybe it's the only book of its type... it's possible, but it's plotted much like Breaking Bad in some sense
it's a story about these German policemen in the early stages of World War II
and they were guys who were old enough to be raised in Germany really before the Hitlerian propaganda came out in full force
if you were a teenager, say, in the 1930s, you were gonna be pulled right into the propaganda machine
and maybe you were part of the Hitler Youth, like you were raised in that, you know
but if you were older, then you were raised before that
and you're not as amenable to propaganda once you're older than about, well, I would say, about 22 or  something like that
it's pretty young, actually; if you're gonna make a soldier, you have to get a soldier young
'cause once people are in their early twenties, say, they already have their personality developed
anyways, these policemen were sent into Poland after the Germans marched through
and, you know, it was wartime, and there was this hypothesis in Germany that
the Jews in particular were operating as a fifth column in undermining the German war effort
because of course the Germans blamed the Jews and a variety of other people for actually  setting up the conditions that made the war necessary
and the police were sent into Poland, they were also required to make peace, roughly speaking
they started out by rounding up all the Jewish men between 18 and 65
and gathering them in stadiums, and then shipping them off on trains, but that isn't where they ended
they ended in a very, very dark place, I mean these guys were going out in the field with naked pregnant women
and shooting them in the back of the head by the end of their training
and what's really interesting about that is that their commander told them that they could go home at any time
so this is not one of those examples of people following orders
and the reason they didn't, roughly speaking, there's many reasons, but one of the reasons they didn't
is because they didn't think it was comradely, so to speak, to leave the guys they were working with
to do all the dirty work and run off; and that's a really interesting fact
because in different circumstances you wouldn't think about that as reprehensible
you'd think: well, that's part of team work under rough circumstances; and that's at least in part how they viewed it
they were also made physically ill multiple times, physically and psychologically ill, by the thing that they had to do
but they kept doing them anyways, so one step at a time
and that's the thing, is that you end up in very bad place one step at a time, so you better watch those steps
anyways, Pinokio has now decided, after his latest misadventure, to return to the proper pathway
he's off to school again, and he's still pretty naive, although perhaps not as much so as he was before
so he decided that he's gonna do things right, he's gonna go get educated, he's going back to school
he's gonna take the conventional route to discipline, and be a good boy, roughly speaking
and so, he's off to school, and the fox waylays him again
this is a really interesting scene, took me quite a long time to unpack this too
and so, the fox, first of all, starts out by acting like he's sympathetic again, sympathetic towards Pinocchio
and so, he's empathetic, you could say, and... so this is an interesting analysis of empathy
so what happens is the fox convinces Pinokio through a variety of maneuvers
that he's actually not feeling very well, that he's sick, he really convinces him that he's a victim
and one of the things... I had a graduate student named Maya Maja Djikic, who had worked with the UN in  Bosnia
and she had toured some of the mass grave sites there, and we wrote a paper one time, called:
"You can neither remember nor forget what you don't understand"
and it was a paper about the idea, for example, it was partly about the idea that we should never forget the Holocaust
and that the idea there is that, well, we should never forget it and we should never repeat it
but the thing is, if you don't understand how those things come about, you can't really remember them, right?
you think about them as a set of historical facts, but that's not the kind of remembering that actually makes any difference
you have to understand the causal pathways, you have to understand how a society would transform in that manner
and more importantly, you have to understand the role of the individuals within that society
unless you're going to assume that they're so completely unlike you that there's no connection whatsoever
in which case you haven't remembered it at all, you haven't learned anything at all
because the right lesson from what happened in the 20th century is: this is what human beings are like
that's the correct lesson, and you can say: well, not me; but...
but probably you too, that's the thing, probably
and probably me too, and least under normal circumstances; anyways...
the Fox convinces Pinocchio that he's sick, he performs a lot of tricks to do this
now, you could say that Pinocchio is susceptible to this
because maybe there's still a part of him that's looking for the easy way out, and so...
one of the things that Maja and I found when we were writing this paper
we were looking at the discourse that precedes genocide and genocidal states
and the enhancement of a sense of victimization on the part of one of the groups
usually the group that's going to commit the genocide
first of all, their sense of being victims is much heightened by the demagogues
who are trying to stir up this sort of hatred, so they basically say: look, you've been oppressed in a variety of ways
and these are the people who did it, and they're not gonna stop doing it, and this time we're gonna get them before they get us
it's something like that; and so there's something very pathological about the enhancement of victimization
which is, well... see the problem as far as I'm concerned with it is, it's not thought through very well
because there's a point that's being made, and the point is that people have been oppressed and they suffer
and that's true, that point; but then the proper framework from within which to interpret that
I believe is that that's characteristic of life, you can't take it personally in some sense
and you can't divide the world neatly into perpetrators and victims
and you certainly can't divide the whole world neatly into perpetrators and victims and then assume that you're only in the victim class
and then assume that that gives you certain... like access to certain... forms of redress, let's say
it gets dangerous very rapidly if you do that sort of thing, so... For example,
one of the things that characterized the Soviet Union - and this was particularly true in the 1920's - but also afterwards
the Soviets were very much enamored of the idea of class guilt.
So, for example, although it was only about 40 years previously that the serfs had been emancipated, they weren't much more than slaves, right?
So that was the bulk of the Russian population. They were bought and sold along with the land.
So, they had been emancipated and some of them - many of them - had turned into independent farmers
and some of them had become reasonably prosperous, because, at least in principle
well, I presume a certain proportion of them from being crooked, but I presume a larger proportion from actually being able to raise food
and of course, at that time the bulk of the Russian food population [sic] was produced by
these relatively successful peasant farmers; and relatively successful would mean
maybe they had a brick house or something, and maybe they had a couple of cows, and maybe they were able to hire a few people
so you know, it wasn't like they were massive land owners or anything
but I talked to you a little bit about the Pareto principle and the notion that in any domain of activity
a small proportion of people end up producing most of what's in that domain of activity
the same was true in Russia with regards to these peasant farmers, some of them were extraordinarily efficient
and they produced most of Russia's food
when the communists came in, they described those land holders as parasites, essentially
predicated on the Marxist idea that if someone had extracted profit from an enterprise
that the had basically stolen that profit from the people, say, that they had employed or otherwise oppressed
so you could be a member of the kulak [spells it out] class
and then because you were a member of that class, you were automatically guilty
so what happened was... and you gotta think this through to really understand what happened
so what happened was the intellectual communists were sent out in cadres out into these little towns
to find people who would help them round up the kulaks; now you gotta think about what a small town is like
because... so imagine you're in a town, and there's three or four people, or maybe ten people or something like that
who are a little more successful than everyone else, and a certain number of people are gonna be fine with that
any maybe eve happy about it, because they regard those people as particularly productive
and, you know, as stalwart members of the community, regardless of their flaws
but there's gonna be some people who are not happy about it at all, that are gonna be very resentful about that and jealous
and so those are gonna be people whose characters, I would say, are of the less positive type
and so when the intellectuals came in and described the reason that these people should be treated as parasites and profiteers
then it was the resentful minority in those towns, and that would be the kind of guy that hangs around in the bar all the time
and is completely unconscientious, and fails at everything, and then blames everyone else for it
the intellectuals came in and said: this is unfair that this happened to you
you've actually been victimized and now it's your opportunity to go have your revenge; and that's exactly what happened
now, in some of the villages sometimes the peasants would actually surround the farmsteads of these more successful people
and try to defend them, but that never worked out for very long
so then these mobs, these angry mobs, would go into the farmhouses and strip the place right down to nothing
and they packed these people up and sent them on trains with no food, out to Siberia where there was no place to live
so they were packed into houses, maybe they had a square meter each to live in
and their children died of typhoid and many of them froze to death
many, many people died, millions of people died as a consequence of the dekulakization
at least in... as a consequence of its total effect
so what happened then was that there wasn't any food produced
and so then six million Ukrainians starved to death in the 1920s, it's something you never hear about, right?
you never hear about that, why do you never hear about that? that's a question worth asking
you know, it was an absolute catastrophe, they used to...
so these people were starving, right to the point of cannibalism, right, I mean it was ugly
it was ugly as anything you could possibly imagine
if you were a mother and... so you're supposed to hand all your grain in to the central committee
most of it for distribution into the cities, you didn't get to keep any food yourself
and so maybe then afterwards, if you were a mother, you'd go out in the fields that had already been harvested
and you'd pick up individual grains of wheat, and if you didn't turn those in, they'd sh... that was death for you
so that's how far it was pushed, so... well, so that's a little story about
how the idea of victimization and perpetration can get out of hand extraordinarily rapidly
so whenever people are beating the victim drum, you know, they'll cover that up with empathy, roughly speaking
we're speaking on behalf of the oppressed; it's like, maybe you are, but maybe you're no saint
because, you know, you're so sure that you're a saint and you're only speaking from the position of good
highly unlikely; anyways, so Pinocchio is enticed into believing that he's a victim
now, the logical part of that is that it is the case that, you know, you can make a very strong case that
every human being is in some sense involved in a tragic enterprise
right? because you're biologically vulnerable, you're not what you could be as a biological specimen, right?
you're full of imperfections and plus, you're going to be sick, and those you love are going to be  sick
and everything ends up in death, and so there's a very tragic element to that
and then, by the same token, you're also subject to the tyrannical aspect of your culture
right, 'cause it's forcing you to be a certain way all the time
socialization does that, you're required to modify your own intrinsic nature in order to come into conformity with the broader community
and you can think about that from the Piagetian sense, which is that socialization makes you a more and more sophisticated person
and there's some truth in that, but you can also be subject just to tyranny, you know
I see people in my practice, for example, they've had very tyrannical fathers, for example
sometimes they have tyrannical mothers as well, but they not so much encouraged
to integrate properly into the social community, as they are harassed and abused
or made to feel insufficient and, you know, basically subject to tyranny
and so it's quite... and that's true of everyone to some degree
you know, you come to university and there's a tyrannical aspect to it; especially in a big institution like this
you're not really marked out as an individual in any sense, you know
you're a number along with 60 thousand other people, and you know, there's something cold and impersonal about that
which is well represented in the design of this classroom, say
but by the same token, you know, the university provides you with an identity
while you're exploring an intellectual landscape, you know, you have a lot of freedom
compared to the vast majority of people, perhaps you don't have as much freedom as you might
if you compared it to some utopian notion of freedom, but in any real world sense, you're unbelievably well protected  by the university
partly because it stamps you with the identity "student", which is a respectable identity
and so you can go off and educate yourself as much as you can
and everyone in society says that's okay, they carve out the protected space for you
so at the same time as you're being tyrannized by the institution
and forced in some ways also to adopt the viewpoints, say, of the professors, depending on the professor
you're also the beneficiary of that, just like you're the beneficiary of this huge industrial infrastructure
that underlies everything that you do; so anyways, the  fact that your life is tragic necessarily
and that you are subject to oppression makes the victimization story really easy to swallow
but then there's a dark side of that, too; and this is actually what happens with Pinokio
so, what happens here is that he's told that he's ill
and convinced that he's ill, and they do use trickery, and...
so again you could look at him in some sense as an innocent victim, but
the innocence... the filmmakers do a good job of hedging against the innocent interpretation
because what he's offered and accepts because he's ill is an easy way out
and so what the fox basically tells him is that he needs to have the vacation, because he's sick
and he can go off to Pleasure Island, which is this place of impulsivity, roughly speaking
and whim, it's like reversion to being two years old in some sense
and that he really needs that, because otherwise he's not going to be able to live properly
he's not going to be able to recover his health; and so what Pinokio is offered...
is the opportunity to abandon your responsibility as a reward for adopting the guise of victim
and that's really worth thinking about, because one of the things I thought about for a long time
is that... I've been trying to figure out what gives people's lives meaning
and tragedy gives life its negative meaning, and nobody disputes that
even if you're nihilistic, you're not going to dispute the fact that tragedy gives life negative meaning
so when nihilists say that life is meaningless, that isn't exactly what they mean
they mean that life is suffering, but there isn't anything transcendent about it that you could set against that suffering
that's nihilism, it's not that life is meaningless, that would just be neutral
it's like... no one believes that, they certainly don't act like they believe it
if you look at it technically, and we will as we progress through this class
in order to have any positive meaning in your life you have to have identified a goal
and you have to be working towards it, and there is a technical reason for that
and the technical reason, as far as I can tell is that the circuitry that produces the kind of positive emotion that people really like
is only activated when you notice that... when you're proceeding towards a goal that you value
and so that means that if you don't have a goal that you value, you can't have any positive emotion
so technically that's the incentive reward system, and it's... the underlying circuitry is dopaminergic
and when that circuitry is activated then it's part of the exploratory circuit, it gives you the sense of being actively engaged in something worthwhile
and that's, you know, you tend to think of positive emotion as something produced by reward
but there's two kinds of positive emotion, one is the reward that's associated with satiation
and that's consummatory reward, and that's the reward you get when you're hungry and you eat
but the thing about eating when you're hungry is that it destroys the framework within which you were operating
it's time to eat, well, you eat, and that framework's no longer relevant, so the consummatory reward eliminates the value framework
and then you're stuck with: well, what are you gonna do next?
and so, the consummatory reward has with it its own problems, but the incentive reward is constantly what keeps you moving forward
and incentive reward, because it's dopaminergic, also is analgesic
literally analgesic; so if you are in pain, you take opiates, and that will cut the pain
but so will psychomotor stimulants, like cocaine or amphetamines
and so, it's literally the case that if you're engaged in something that's engaging, you're working towards a goal
that you're going to feel less pain; and you can see this happening with athletes, you know, they'll break their thumb or something
or maybe sometimes even their ankle, and they'll keep playing the game, 'course afterwards they're suffering like mad
but the fact that they're so filled with goal-directed enthusiasm means that, well, the pain systems are in some sense shut off
so that's an interesting thing, because what it suggests...
I mean, then you can imagine... I might say: well, how happy are you that you've made a certain amount of progress?
and if you think about it what you'd say is: well, it depends on how much progress and in relationship to what
so hypothetically you're gonna be happier if you'd made quite a bit of progress towards a really important goal
and then you have to think through what it means for a goal to be really important, 'cause that's not obvious
now, you could say: you're in this class, and you're listening to some information
and maybe there's two reasons for that: you might find the information interesting per se, but let's forget about that for a minute
you need to listen to the information so that you can do well on the assignment, so that you can do well in the class
you need to do well in your class so that you can finish up your degree
you need to finish up your degree so that you can find your place in the world
you need to do that so that you're financially stable and maybe you can start a family and have a life
and that's all part of being a good person, something like that
and so, that's a hierarchy of goals, and you might say that being a good person would be the thing, however vaguely thought through, that's at the top of that hierarchy
and then, when you're doing things that serve that ultimate purpose, then you're gonna find those more meaningful
and that meaning is actually produced as a consequence of the engagement of this exploratory circuit
that's nested right down in your hypothalamus, it's really, really, old
it's as old as thirst, and it's as old as hunger, it's really an old system
and so, you wanna have that thing activated, I mean, at least from a...
well, it isn't only from a hedonic point of view, you know, it's a matter of being happy
it's the wrong way of thinking about it, it's much more complicated than that, it's... yes?
[student] I was actually just about to ask like a hedonic element, 'cause I'm just trying to understand
[student] this... I guess... not relationship but the differentiation between hedonism and satiation
[student] and you... like going back to when you mentioned that it's not that life is meaningless
[student] but hedonism isn't exactly... like it's not satiation, because
[student] at that point people are just doing what they're doing for the sake doing
[student] it's not just for activation of the dopaminergic system
[student] so I was trying to understand...
well, what I would say, we're going to into that A LOT once we're done with this, like a lot
but I'll go over it briefly, I mean, it's not merely hedonism
because there's an analgesic and also a fear-reducing element to pursuing a proper path
right, so there's control of negative emotion, but there's not just control of negative emotion and generation of positive emotion in the immediate future
which is kinda what you think about with regards to hedonism; actually, Pinokio takes a hedonic route next
the problem with the hedonic route is that... so the pursuit of pure happiness, let's say
is that what makes you happy in the next minute might not be something that will make you happy in the next hour
well you know that, there's this comic, what's his name, they call him king of the one-liners
he talked about drinking wine; don't you know that's gonna cause a hangover?
and he said: yeah, at the end, but the beginning and middle are excellent
and so that's really the problem with hedonism, right, is that
to pursue something that makes you happy in the immediate present
risks sacrificing your, well, many things, but at least, let's say, your hedonism in the medium to long term
and of course that is one of the major problems with drug use, and alcohol's a really good example of that
because whatever hedonic kick you might get from it that moment at night
you're going to pay for almost completely or maybe even more so, because the next day you're
much more jittery and anxious, and that's a direct consequence of withdrawing from the drug
so when you're in... when you have a hangover you're in alcohol withdrawal
so that's how fast you get, roughly speaking, addicted to it
and so if you take another drink when you're hungover it'll cure it, but it's not a very useful cure
because all you do is push the inevitable hangover one more step into the future
and so part of the problem with the hedonic answer is: happy when?
exatly; and over what period of time? and also: who's happy?
because maybe something makes you happy but makes your family miserable
now, you could say, well, I don't care, but you do care if you have to live with your family
because they're gonna take it out on you; so the impulsive hedonism, which is also fostered, say, by a positive emotion
it tends to put people into a state of... the pursuit of short-term hedonism, it's not a good medium to long-term solution
I actually think that's why people evolved conscientiousness
right, 'cause conscientiousness is not happy, conscientious people aren't conscientious because it makes them happy
we're starting to think that they're conscientious because they actually feel terrible if they're just sitting around doing nothing
and so it's a way of staving off stress that's related to enforced leisure, something like that
you know, if you know industrious people, some of you are industrious
some of you will have industrious parents, they just can't sit around and do nothing, they have to be working
they don't feel good unless they're working; so one thing about conscientiousness is that
it involves continual sacrifice, right, you're doing difficult things in the present, hypothetically to make the future better
but that's not driven by hedonism by any stretch of the imagination; and conscientiousness is actually a pretty good predictor of long-term life success
in stable societies; 'cause there's also no point in being conscientious and saving things up
and storing things if a bunch of thugs are gonna just come in randomly and take it all away
so conscientiousness actually only works intelligently in societies that have some medium to long-term stability
you know, 'cause you can get wiped out by hyperinflation, too, 'cause hyperinflation kills off the conscientious people
the people who accrued debts are thrilled when hyperinflation kicks in, because it wipes out their debts
but of course those debts are the things they owed to people who were conscientious enough to save
so anyways, Pinocchio is transformed into a victim, and he's offered this identity, and he takes it
now, it's partly 'cause he's deceived and manipulated
but it's also partly because the Fox offers him the abandonment of responsibility as payment for adopting the victim identity
so this is where his own lack of morality, let's say, 'cause this is all about Pinocchio's development as a character
plays a role in his demise
if I'm a victim, everyone else owes me something, and I don't have to take any responsibility
and so, one of the things I've wondered... here's something to think about:
it might be that the sense of meaning that life can provide to you is proportionate to the amount of responsibility you decide to take on
and that'd be very strange if it was the case, you know, because responsibility of course is a kind of weight, obviously
and it's difficult to take on responsibility; but if any positive emotion that you feel and your control of anxiety
and the control over pain is dependent on the activation of the systems that watch you move towards a desired goal
then the more complete and weighty the goal is, the more kick there's going to be in the observation that you're moving towards it
and you know, you kinda already know this, because you'll have observed in your own life
that when you're engaged in something that you believe in, that the time passes properly
you know, you can see this even if you're... maybe you're reading a paper and it's actually related in some intelligible manner to something that you wanna learn
so even though it's difficult, you get engaged in it, you can remember it better, you process it better
and you're not so likely to fall asleep, and you're not so likely to wanna find distractions, all of that
you can get into it; and it would be very interesting if that was proportionate to the degree of responsibility
that you're willing to shoulder, and I think you can make a strong case for that
I've also often wondered: imagine you could offer people a choice
here's the choice: you can say, well, your life isn't meaningful, the nihilists have got it right
there's no meaning in your life, and because of that there's no reason for you to accept any responsibility
so you can live a responsibility-free life and maybe one of impulsive pleasure-seeking
but a responsibility-free life; but the price you pay is that it doesn't get to be meaningful
or you could say to someone: no, we're gonna do the opposite, we're gonna say: you can live a meaningful life
but it's only gonna be as meaningful as the amount of responsibility that you're willing to bear
and then you might say: well, what would people choose? 'cause everybody always makes noises about wanting to have a meaningful life
but if the price you pay for that is the adoption of responsibility, then it's not so obvious people would choose meaning over pointless pursuits
if they had to... if the benefit they got for choosing the pointless pursuits was that they didn't have to care about anything they ever did
there's no responsibility, and that's really what Pinocchio is offered, and that's what the Coachman offers him
and that's interesting, because, you know, so far it's been the Fox and the Cat, and they're kinda two-bit hoods
and so, the pathological pathway that they offer Pinocchio is not the worst of the pathological pathways
but here, at least as far as the imagination, the collective imagination that created this movie is concerned
this is where you get to the most pathological form of, let's call it temptation
and that's the temptation to engage in... to abandon responsibility and to engage in impulsive pleasure seeking
short-term pleasure seeking
so here's the Fox, pretending to be a doctor investigating Pinocchio's illness
and he makes some notes, which is all just meaningless scribble
it's like white noise, and it doesn't matter that the arguments that he's making  are completely incoherent
and it doesn't matter that he actually doesn't know anything, what he's selling is easy to buy
and so Pinocchio buys it
and by the end of the conversation with the Fox he's pretty convinced that he's useless
and that he needs a vacation; you know...
this is an oedipal situation as well, which I touched on the other lecture, I mean...
let's imagine that you have a child that is a little on the neurotic side, so high negative emotion
and maybe one that's also a little bit on the sickly side, so it has a variety of relatively minor ailments, but ailments nonetheless
and so what that means as a parent, we'll say mother for this example, 'cause I want to use the oedipal example
you have to make a decision all the time about exactly how you're gonna treat that child
one decision is: well, I'm not gonna... you don't have to go to school today, because you're not feeling well, but
fair enough, but do you make the same decision the next day? and do you make the same decision the next day?
and let's imagine that you enable the child to avoid responsibility as a consequence of capitalizing on their illness
well then that's not gonna be very good for the child, the rule with a sickly child has to be something like:
I'm gonna push you right to your limit; because otherwise how is the person gonna figure out what they can do?
and if they can't figure out what they can do, then they're not gonna be able to make their way in the world at all
and then that gets muddied very badly if you're not exactly sure that you want them to make their way in the world, you know
maybe you're just as happy, because you'd be sitting at home, alone if your child was there with you
and maybe you'd be just as happy at some level if they never grew up at all
because then they won't leave; and maybe that's because you have a terrible marriage, and you're lonesome, you know
maybe it's an abusive marriage and your husband has chased away all your friends
and so you don't have anything at all, and maybe that's 'cause you didn't stand up for yourself very well
apart from the fact that he was, you know, tyrannical in his central nature
and so then all those little warps and bends in your psyche are gonna manifest themselves right...
right in the background of every one of those decisions
my daughter had a lot of illnesses when she was adolescent, and they were very serious, and
it was very difficult to figure out what to do about that, because you couldn't exactly apply normative rules, right?
and we always had to figure out if she was communicating her symptoms to us, how seriously to take those
and the answer was: the least amount of serious possible, it's something like that, because
we needed to know, and she needed to know, what she could do in spite of the fact that she  had problems
and one of the things I really tried to instill in her, and I think it worked, is that:
you don't ever wanna use your illness as an excuse for not doing anything
not consciously, you know, sometimes you might not know, "I'm not feeling well, what can I do?"
well you don't know, right, because sometimes when you're not feeling well, you can do more than you think, and sometimes you can do less than you think
it's not like it's obvious, but sometimes it's obvious, you know, this little temptation flits through your mind, and you think:
well, I don't really wanna do what I'm doing today, and I'm not feeling very well, so I don't have to do it
you do that a hundred times, and *you* don't know how sick you are anymore
and then you're in real trouble, because not only are you sick, but you actually have... you've muddied the waters
and so you have both problems, is you're actually ill, and you've  betrayed yourself
by using that as an excuse not to pursue your responsibilities
and that, I think, if both of those thing happen to you at the same time, you're in real trouble
and it's really hard not to have that happen
so anyways, Pinokio gets enticed into believing he's a victim
the fact that he's insufficient is used as an excuse by the fox and the cat to offer him a trip to Pleasure Island
and this is, I think, where the movie gets particularly dark
and so off they go, singing away; they have to carry him
so you could say in some sense he's carried by societal pathology and his own trouble
he's carried like a puppet off to Pleasure Island; and so the Cricket...
the Cricket is again left behind, he's not the world's best conscience at this point
so, Pinokio goes off to meet the Coachman, and the Coachman has already said he's collecting bad little boys
and he's got them on the coach, they're all delinquent types here
and the ticket on the coach was the ace of spades, which is what Pinocchio is holding
and he's with this character here, called Lampwick
and that's an interesting name, so he's the thing that burns in the middle of a light, lamp wick
and that's interesting, because it's a play on Lucifer, 'cause Lucifer means 'bringer of light'
and so Lampwick is a play on that, and Lampwick is really a nasty piece of work
he's got this false arrogance about him, he's got this cynical voice, really deeply cynical voice
and he's only... I don't know how old he's supposed to be in this, maybe 12 or something like that, 13
And so he's one of those kids who's become prematurely cynical
I'll tell you a story about that
so I used to live in Montreal, I lived in a poor neighborhood
and one day I was out in the back alley, building a fence, 'cause I was putting a fence around my little tiny back yard
and there was a house across the alley down the street aways, where there was a lot of, like
not good partying, a lot of bikers were hanging around there, ans I knew there was a little kid that lived there as well
anyways, I was out there in the back alley, pounding away on my fence, and these little kids came up
and they were little, they were like 3 and 4 years old, hey, and they spoke joual
a kind of really heavily accented quebecois french, and my french isn't good
so I could hardly understand them; but they were watching me hammer, and they got a little closer
and they had one kid who was clearly the leader, had a real scowl on his face, eh?
and so they were watching, and I kinda motioned to one of them, that they could use the hammer
and that kid said, and I'm gonna mangle this, but he said "je voulai" or something like that
and what it meant is "I'll steal that"; and so I thought... you know, and then he came over and he tugged on it
and he wanted to take it, and he was quite angry that I wasn't gonna let him take it, and then so...
so I couldn't engage him, I couldn't get him to play, you know, and his buddies were sort of hanging around behind him, and
they wouldn't come and play, because he wouldn't, and so he was hostile right away to me
and then... so the fence piece was laying out in the alley, and these little monsters started running across it
which I thought was really remarkable, you know, but it was terrible at the same time, because they were really little kids
that shouldn't be happening when you're like 3 or 4; if that's happening at that age, things are not good
and so that kid was already like seriously not happy with the world
and you know, I've been studying antisocial behavior for a long time by that point, and I knew that
the kids who are destined to jail later in their lives are kids who are rough and tough when they're two years old, but then don't get socialized
or maybe worse, they get anti-socialized, which is exactly what happened to this kid, he'd obviously been ignored and abused
certainly no one had ever played with him in any real way, because he wouldn't play; and it's not good if a kid is that little
and you can't get them to play, something's gone seriously wrong, 'cause they're so playful at that age, that it's like 90% of them
anyways, so they were running back and forth on this fence, I thought, stomping on it, you know
and I was right there, I thought, well, first of all I thought that was remarkable, but I also thought it was absolutely horrifying, because
you know, in some sense I could see where this kid was headed and why
at that early stage in his life, it's really... it's not a pleasant thing to behold
but there was nothing that could be done about it, and that... kinda what this Lampwick is like
he's prematurely cynical, this kid was already cynical, and he was like 4 years old
you know, most kids don't get cynical 'till they're teenagers, and then often they don't get completely cynical and usually they more or less grow out of it
but it happened to him much earlier; so this Lampwick character, he's already decided that
he knows everything, that everyone else's opinion is worth nothing
and that there's nothing in cultre or society that holds any utility whatsoever for someone like him
now, you can imagine developing that way, if you were raised in a family where people were generally lying to you
and that they randomly treated you or neglected you, and that you couldn't discern anything about them that was admirable or positive
of course you assume the whole structure is corrupt, and that you had to take care of yourself, and no one else
well, not of course, not everyone assumes that under those situations, I shouldn't say "of course"
but it's a logical set of conclusions, so...
and of course it's proportionate to some degree to how much abuse you tak, althought there are lots of stories of people who've been terribly abused as children
who grew up to be, you know, kind, remarkable, responsible, thoughtful
people who were absolutely opposed to abuse, instead of propagating it
there's no direct causal pathway
anyways, Lampwick is pretty happy to be on this coach way to Pleasure Island which he's heard about
he said, "well, it's all you can eat, all you can smoke, you don't have to do any work, you can do anything you want"
so you might say, well, it's too good to be true, like the ginger bread house in the Hansel and Grettel story
right, the kids are lost, there's a ginger bread house, it's a house, which is something they need, and it's made out of cookies
it looks like it's a little bit too good to be true, and of course in the house there's the negative part of that
which is the old witch who wants to eat children; and that's a story about what happens to people if they're offered more than they should be offered
so... anyways, Lampwick is firing off... he has a little slingshot
and he's firing off pebbles at the horses who are pulling the carriage, and that's just the kind of guy that he is
so he takes Pinocchio under his wing; and the Cricket is down there in the dust, he's caught back up to the carriage
but he's having a rough time at this point
this is also a story, to some degree, about transitioning to adolescence
you know, because adolescence is a time when people are pretty impulsive, and their view is quite short-term
and are more likely to pursue immediate pleasures and all of that, and that can get really out of hand, so...
anyways, they separate from the mainland, and go on a boat, and so they're off to Pleasure Island
a dark place; and the Coachman opens the gates and lets the delinquents into Pleasure Island, and
they basically have a riot; and this is Pleasure Island, here, it's full of amusement park rides, and
you know, one of the things that's kind of interesting about horror movies, I'm sure you've noticed this, is that they're often set in amusement parks
and clowns are often characters of horror, we'll leave the clowns aside for now, but the amusement park thing, that's pretty interesting
why in the world would an amusement park be a place of horror?
and the first question might be: well, have you ever been to an amusement park? because there is something about them, that's really...
they have a dark side, a clear dark side, and part of it is that
people with nothing better to do are spending money stupidly, and they're being fleeced by the people who operate the amusement park
you know, and they have, let's say, a stereotypically dark reputation
and they're moving around all the time, this is also something that psychopaths do
and all they're doing is moving from community to community, and taking the money from the rubes, fundamentally
and so, the amusement park, well...
if you walk through an amusement park with that sort of thing in mind, maybe that's also coloring your vision, of course, but
it's something that you could see very immediately; so there's something about them that's deeply sad, but there's also an underlying horror that characterizes them
it's easy for a horror movie or horror novel writers to immediately expand upon, there's something about it that
that makes sense to people, so...
it's too easy, maybe that's... and it's also all short-term gratification, that's the other thing
so you spend your money very rapidly, and it's gone; yes?
[student] seems like a celebration of meanings divorced from reality (?)
yes, exactly, well, that's the impulsive element; the comment was it's a celebration of meanings divorced from reality
yeah, it's also outside of reality, right, that's why it's on an island, it's a separate universe
and it's a universe where nothig that's happening is connected to anything outside
and you're spending your hard-earned money, let's say, but it isn't that much... it's certainly not an investment
it's not that much different than burning it, well, it is, because of course you get some pleasure out of it, but
it isn't... going there every day is probably not the wisest move that you could make, so...
the animators do a good job of, well, of presenting the, what would you call it
the enforced hedonism, I guess I would say, of a place like that; this is a place where you're gonna have fun, that's what it's for, so...
anyways, Lampwick, who's got this very arrogant look on his face, and this kind of strut
it's a bravado, that's what it's called, it's a false confidence
it's the sort of thing that people do when they're trying to impress upon others that they're high in the dominance hierarchy
but really they're not, so it's a mimicry of dominance
but it's something that can be intimidating, there's no doubt about it
I had a friend, he didn't come to a good end
this person who was a real good friend of mine, when I was in junior high and high school, and he was kind of crazy
and he was tall, he was a bout six foot seven, and he was pretty thin
and we used to go out to the bar now and then, and in many of the bars that we were in, we lived in this little town
there were bullies, and these were guys... and I worked in the bars, and I used to watch these guys, and they'd basically...
there was a handful of them in town, pretty psychopathic types
and they'd go to the bar, and all they'd do is sit there and wait for someone to come in who they could beat up
they knew who it was as soon as they walked in, that's actually why they were at the bar
and so they'd wait 'till someone came in, who didn't look very confident, and who could likely be intimidated by this sort of thing, and then they'd
tell him to come outside for a fight, and if they didn't, well then they'd of course make fun of him, and if they did, well, generally they'd beat them up
my friend kinda caught on to this trick, and he started going into bars, and every time that someone like that came near him
he'd go outside and fight with them; and one of the things he observed right away is that
almost inevitably when he went outside with them, they'd shake hands and make friends
so as soon as he... and it was realy remarkable, watching him, 'cause he wasn't a particularly physically powerful person
although he was extraordinarily tall; but he had started to play this game, and he did it for  along time, and
I don't remember him ever actually having to fight, he just stared them down, fundamentally
so it was a very interesting thing to watch, but it was an indication to me of exactly how shallow this kind of bravado, bullying actually is
but people don't find that out, because they won't stand up, and it's not surprising, but...
anyways, they load up on food, Pinocchio's carrying a pie and a an ice cream cone simultaneously
and then they're off to have a fight, and Lampwick says something like:
it's good to punch someone in the nose sometimes just for the, I think he says, heck of it
and so Pinokio adopts this strut, and in they go to the roughhouse
and then, in the next scene, you see this model home up for destruction, it's quite an interesting scene symbolically, you see...
in the middle of this house here there's a stained-glass window that has a mandala on it, we'll see it more clearly in a minute
and a mandala is a sacred symbol of the Self, that's the Jungian interpretation
it's a symbol... it's very difficult to describe, but it's a symbol...
music is a mandala, except it's  played out across time, so you could say that thing is the same as music, but it's kinda like a slice of music
it's the same idea, you know sometimes you see those slow-motion or sped-up-motion videos of a flower unfolding?
that's the same idea, you can imagine that being se to music, and somehow that would make sense
and the mandala's like a symbol of the unfolding of being, or the source of meaning, or something like that
and it's also a symbol of the Self from the jungian perspective
so there you see it more clearly; the kids are starting to burn this place
and trash it, and they're dragging the grand piano down the stairs, it's a destruction of high culture
about which they are nothing but cynical, 'cause they don't believe that hard work and sacrifice can
can produce something of any value, and they want to bring it down and destroy it, and that's partly because...
you can see this in the story of Cain and Able
Able is hardworking and everyone likes him, and he makes the proper sacrifices, and so his life goes pretty well
and that's part of the reason Cain hates it, and he's jealous and resentful, but worse than that
if you're around someone, if you're not doing very well, especially if that's your own fault
if you're not doing very well, and you're around someone who's doing very well, it's very painful, because
the mere fact of their being judges you, and so it's very easy to wanna destroy that
to destroy that ideal so that you don't have to live with the terrible consequences of seeing it embodied in front of you
and so part of the reason that people wanna tear things down is so that they don't have anything to contrast themselves against and to feel bad
and that's exactly what's happening here, the kids are destroying all of this culture, roughly speaking
because it judges them; the fact that it exists judges them; and I've often thought this about Michelangelo's statue of David
which is this heroic... so David was a shepherd, obviously, and it doesn't sound like much, but
back in those times being a shepherd was a big deal, because there were lions, and you had a slingshot
so like, you've got to defend your sheep from lions with a slingshot
so you weren't exactly this, like, 19th century English guy dressed in a, you know, frilly blue suit
you were tough as a bloody... well, someone who would go after a lion with a slingshot, it's no joke
anyways, the statue is very heroic, and, you know, you look at that, you think, well, that's the possibility of human kind
but by the same token it's also what you're not, and so, as well as being an ideal, it's a judge
and every ideal is a judge, so... yes?
[student] going back to your example of Cain and Able, um, so you're using that as an example illustrating
[student] becoming bitter as a result of not being able to achieve status... success as a result of hard work
[student] but in the example of Cain and Able, um, like one was a shepherd, and one was a farmer, and the one who was favored
[student] so was that a result of the hard work or was that a result of... (agriculture being favored?)
good question, those stories are very compicated
and the story is very ambivalent about whether Cain is not rewarded because he makes bad sacrifices
or beause God's just in a bad mood; I like that... if you read the story
I read multiple translations of the story, and when Cain comes to God to complain
God basically tells him: look, buddy, before you go about criticizing the structure of reality
you should look to your own inadequacies; he says: sin crouches at your door like a predatory, sexually aroused animal
and you invited it in to have its way with you, and something has emerged as a consequence
so don't be botherin' me about my creation before you look to yourself
so there's a very strong hint that the reason that God has not favored Cain's sacrifices because they weren't of particularly good quality
but it is ambivalent in the story, and there is the sheperd versus farmer motif as well
and of course that motif runs through the entire corpus of stories to some degree, especially the shepherd motif
so, it's only about a paragraph long, that whole story and it packs all that into that tiny little amount of space
but the idea that Cain kills Abel to get rid of his ideal
and also to punish God, roughly speaking, it's a brilliant story; I mean...
these guys who go around shooting up highschools, they're shooting at... highschools in particular, but...
you know, they're definitely out for revenge, and what they're revenging themselves against or to who is not exactly clear
anyways, so these kids are just tearing down this model home
tearing down western civilization, I suppose is another way of looking at it, or just tearing down civilization, period
and Pinokio's having a pretty good time, he's got his axe, and he's looking a little malevolent there
and happy to be destroying things, which is of course a pretty simple thing to do
so there's that image that I told you about, the mandala, and that's a flower in this image
and so, what happens is that, I think it's Lampwick, throws a brick through it
and so, what that means symbolically: the self is a symbol of your potential, among very many other things
but by engaging in this sort of impulsive, destructive activity Lampwick and Pinocchio are making it impossible to further their development
and they're doing that to some degree consciously, they basically say: to hell with it
and toss a brick through this highest ideal, the thing through which light shines, so also that harkens back to the star as well
so, anyways, the coachman is paying attention to all this
and he's actually pretty happy about the fact that these boys are so involved in their stupid amusements
that they're not paying any attention to what's actually going on
he calls these people out of the darkness, these creatures out of the darkness, so...
you get these black... you can hardly see them there, but theyre black cloaked figures with glowing eyes
and they're shutting the door of the amusement park
and that's very interesting, it's an extraordinarily interesting happening
it's like, ok, so all of a sudden the amusement park... we already know that the Coachman is up to no good
but now he's got these minions that are faceless in some sense, they're clearly creatures of the night
and they're up to no good, and so you have this sense that...
that the boys are being offered bread and circuses, roughly speaking
but there's something... there's a real reason for it, there's a manipulative reason
for it, they're being enticed into a trap, the doors are closed, and these underground beings are involved in the plot
and obviously the coachman understands this perfectly well; so one of the ways to understand this
is to think about what totalitarian states have to offer their populace, and
what they offer them, and this happened particularly as Rome declined, let's say
that's where the term bread and circuses originally came from, is that
as the situation degenerates, then people have to be offered stupid amusements more and more frequently
in order for them ignore what's actually going on in the background
you know, a war can be that kind of stupid  amusement
anyways, later that night the entire place is completely devastated, and all we see is the wreckage of everything that was there before
and again the Cricket has gotten separated from Pinocchio, and so he's trying to find him
and Pinocchio ends up in this... this bar that's shaped like an 8-ball
the 8-ball is kind of the random ball in pool, and anyways he's inside the 8-ball, and
he's shooting pool with Lampwick, and that's just another indication of wasting his time, basically, and
you can see in the forefront there's some cards for gambling, so he's engaged in these sort of
you might say, pointless, hedonic hedonic pursuits, and he's enticing Pinocchio along the same route, and so
he teaches him to smoke, first, that doesn't go very well, so Pinocchio takes a huge drag on his cigar
and it just about kills him, and when Lampwick asks him how he likes it
he shakes his head and says, you know, that it's really, was really quite good, but he's so sick that he can hardly stand up
and he's hallucinating double balls on the pool table, and
then the cricket shows up and stands on the 8-ball, and kinda gives him one of those declamatory speeches again
you know, 'cause he still hasn't quite figured out that standing up proud and spouting off the rules isn't exactly
the right way for the conscience to behave; and Lampwick picks him up by the scruff of the neck
roughly speaking, and first of all asks who he is, so obviously he's divorced from his own conscience
and then makes fun of Pinocchio for paying attention to this little bug, and
that's kind of a nice indication of what happens at adolescence, you know, because
of course as children move away from their parents and into their groups, especially when the groups are misbehaving
often what happens is that the other members of the group will torture a person who isn't willing to try something dangerous or foolish
by making fun of the fact that they're, you know, too attached to their conscience
there's a positive element to that, because you should take some risks when you're a teenager, and also later in life, and so
if you won't take any risks, there's actually something wrong with you, but there's a negative element in that
well, you know, teenagers do all sorts of stupid things, and perhaps it's amazing that we all live all live through it actually, as far as I'm concerned
some people take extraordinary risks, extraordinary risks
and they don't make it through at all or they end up in the permanently antisocial population
and then they're, you know, basically carreer criminals; five percent of the criminals commint 95% of the crimes
it's another Pareto distribution, so...
anyways, Lampwick isn't gonna listen to Pinocchio or to the Cricket, he laughs at him with this kind of braying laugh
which is some foreshadowing, and the Cricket gets all upset, puts his coat on backwards
and ends up dumped down a pool table hole, and otherwise abused, and so
he stomps on out of there, he tells Pinocchio that he can take care of himself, and he stomps on out of there
and so Pinocchio is left without the guidance of conscience, and the Cricket is trying to figure out how to get off Pleasure Island
BUT! he goes through the gates and he sees what's actually going on
and what's going on is that the Coachman had this like slave boat
down in the bowels of the island, and he's got all these black-suited minions with the glowing eyes
working for him, and they're rounding up what looked like donkeys
and so they're beast of burden, right? and so there's an idea here that if you produce...
if you pursue impulsive pleasure to the detriment of the development of your character
you're going to end up a beast of burden, you're going to end up a slave to a tyrant
and that's exactly right, and so, anyways, the Cricket doesn't...
you can see one of those black-suited horrors here, hauling donkeys out of this crate
and one of them has a hat on, and they look very sad
and they're in different crates, and one of them says: sold to the salt mines, and one of them says: sold to the circus
so they're shipped off to be slaves, roughly speaking
and they look very sad, and then one of them gets hauled out of a crate, and he's still got a hat on
he has a hat on and a sweater, and he can still talk, he's a boy, it turns out
that's been half-transformed into a jackass, a brying jackass prior to being enslaved
so that's another thing that's quite interesting about the story, you know, it also makes the case that if you
replace your voice with stupid braying, that the probability that you're going to become enslaved by a tyrant is extraordinarily high
and I always can't help but think about ideologues in that manner, you know
Solzhenitsyn wrote about the radical left ideologues that got thrown in the gulag archipelago, you know
so they were part stalwarts, this happened to a lot of people, true believers
who were vacuumed up by the stalinist machine and thrown into the gulag anyways, and
he said that those people suffered in some ways more than everyone else, because
what did he say? they were  bit by the beloved hand that fed them
and so the first while when they were in the camps, Solzhenitsyn didn't really know what to do with people like that
because on the one hand, well, they were in the camps, and wasn't that awful, and they've been torn away from their family
and you know, stripped of all their identity, and their status, so that's pretty rough
but on the other hand they were writing letters protesting their innocence
and assuming that everyone else in the camp was guilty, but they were innocent, and they were still strident believers in the communist process
and so, you know, it was a conundrum, here they are being terribly punished
but by the same token they're also the perpetrators of their own demise, so how do you deal with them?
they used to play "comrades", he said they used to play "comrades" with people like that
and invite them into an ideological discussion about the camp situation, and the situation in the country as a whole
and let them rattle out their ideological justifications for everything that had happened
trying to make them parody themselves, roughly speaking, it was a rough game
and Solzhenitsyn also concluded that there was no helping someone like that
when they were still ensconced inside that braying ideology, you could predict everything they were going to say
it's like someone had a crank, you could just crank it, and out would come the proper ideological formulas
but then he realized that as soon as they, let's call it, repented of that
and started to realize they're own role in it or the error of the system
then he would start communicating with them, you know, as if they were people who you could communicate with
yeah, that was very interesting, as far as I'm concerned
anyways, this kid is still a little bit human, he starts to cry for his mom
and the Coachman basically throws him back into the crate and says that he's not ready yet
and the reason for that is that he could still... he still had the power of independent speech
you remember, right at the beginning of the movie, when the mouth was painted on Pionokio
we saw that mask that was really glaring at the process, I said that character recurrs continuously throughout the movie
and this is a good example of that, because the Coachman is the enemy of anything that has it's own voice
so he's the anti-Gepetto, that's a good way of thinking about it, he's the tyrannical aspect of the culture
but insofar as one of these mostly donkeys, mostly jackasses can still talk
then they're not completely fit for slavery; and you remember this movie was also being made at about the same time that
the Nazi transformation of Germany was taking place, and so all these terrible ounderground things
you know, this process whereby people were being reduced to ideological slaves, say
and in this terrible process that was all playing out in Europe in a very big way
It was not that people were not aware of that. It was in the air. So...
Anyway, the donkeys and the jackass can still talk.
Crying and complaining and repenting, and
the Coachman turns into a  full tyrant again cracks a whip if I remember correctly,
and says: "You had your fun, and now you're gonna pay for it."
The Cricket gets word of all this, he gets wind of it, he starts to understand what happened
is that all these bad kids were enticed out onto this island so that they could be enslaved
and he's really taken aback by that, to say the least
when he realizes what's going on, so he runs back to find Pinokio, and then the scene switches back to the 8-ball bar where
where Lampwick is drinking beer and complaining about what the conscience said
you know, 'cause he's kinda guilty and ashamed, but he won't admit it, 'cause he doesn't admit anything
he knows everything, he's not gonna admit anything about himself that isn't perfect, he's a real totalitarian in training
and he drinks this beer, and he's laughing about the conscience and putting him down
and then he says, well, what does he say exactly...?
"what does he think I am, a jackass?" or something like that, maybe that's not the words exactly
and then he grows these ears, and Pinokio sees that and immediately takes a look at the beer and stops drinking it
and then Lampwick transforms one more time, and his face turns into the face of a donkey
and he's laughing still, and then his hands... oh yes, he laughs and then he starts to bray
like a jackass, he's horrified by that, and then Pinokio laughs, and the braying comes out as well
so now they're absolutely horrified, and Lampwick actually figures out what's going on
he figures out that he's been tricked and that he's transforming and he's completely horrified by it
he becomes conscious of what's happening to him; and there's one particularly, I would say, dramatic scene where
his hands have transformed into hooves, and he's kicking and leaping around the room in panic
and he comes up to a mirror, he sees himself as the jackass, and then he turns around and breaks the mirror
so, you know, he's self-conscious for a moment, then he destroys his capacity for self-consciousness
then he transforms entirely into a jackass, he's farther down the road than Pinokio [should be 'further']
and he comes crawling to Pinokio to save him, and asks that the conscience comes back
so that he can get out of this, but of course it's a bit too late, and
so then Pinokio grows jackass ears, and
he's absolutely terrified by it as well, he knows what's coming
and the cricket comes back, and guides him off Pleasure Island, and so then they end up on a cliff
because this is an island, after all, and they have to jump into the unknown
right, out of this impulsive, adolescent, hedonic playground into the unknown
and that's how they escape; so that's the first time that Pinokio has to leave...
this is the first scene where he has to jump into the water to make a clean break from something pathological
so tyranny... you see this echoed... you see echoes of this in the story of Moses leading his people from Egypt
because Moses is a master of water, right? he hits a rock with a stick and water comes out of it
and he's floating on water when he's an infant, and he parts the red sea, and
so he's a master of water and transformation, and the pharaoh's kingdom is represented as desert stone, roughly speaking
and so, the idea there is that, well, the kingdom is solid ground
but it can be a tyranny, and the water is chaos, but it can be the thing that you have to leap into to free yourself from the tyranny
it's not like in the Moses story that that comes easy, right, because the Hebrews leave Egypt, which is a terrible tyranny
and you think, well, that's good, they escaped from the tyranny
that isn't what happens, they escape from the tyranny, they actually end up somewhere arguably worse
'cause they're wandering around in the desert for forty years
and that's... it's a brilliant element of that story, because it states clearly that
when you go from a bad place to a better place you go to a worse place first
and that's a great... it's a great thing to know
because it also tells you why you might be unwilling to take the next step
you know, you're aiming up, but in order to aim up you have to let go of something you already have
and then that will put you into a state of chaos
and unless you're willing to undergo that intermediary state of chaos, and you might not recover from it
you're not gonna get to the next level
so that's rough, well, so Pinokio, he decides that chaos is better than tyranny
and guided by his conscience
we don't see anything happening in the water in this particular scene
they come back to shore all half-drowned and exhausted by their adventure
and they go back home, and I think maybe we'll take a break now, let's see, this is a good time to take a break
1:30, perfect, so let's break for 15 minutes, okay? alright
alright, so
Carl Jung talked about this phenomenon he...
he described as retrogressive restoration of the persona
and so, it's a complicated idea, but basically what it means is that sometimes you take a leap forward
and you learn some things, but you can't catalyze a new identity, so you try to go back and hide in your old identity
and that actually doesn't work, because, well, things have changed, and you've learned something, and that isn't who you are anymore
and so it's like you have to cut parts of yourself off in a destructive manner to fit back into the person that you were
now, what happens here is that Pinokio escapes from this tyrannical situation
and undergoes this descent into chaos, but he tries to go back home, he tries to go back to what he was
and he can't do that anymore, his father isn't at home anymore, and so
so when he goes home he finds that there's no home there, now
this happens to people sometimes, and it's often a shock to them, so
one of the things I've noticed about Peter Pan type... I'm gonna speak about men here, because I've observed it more in men
is that they often stay under the thumb of their father, and you think, well
why would someone do that, because it means they subject to the tyrannical judgment of their father
they're always concerned about what their father would think or whether their father approves of them and so forth
and you think, well, that's gotta be an unpleasant place to be, why would you do that?
one of the things that I've suggested to my clients and to other people sometimes is that...
here's a weird little exercise that you can undertake, a little thought experiment
so you have your parents and of course your parents have friends who are about their age, and
maybe some of them are people you only know peripherally, and I might ask you, well
do you care more about what your parents think than you care about what these peripheral people who know your parents think?
and then the answer to that is, well, of course, and then the question that arises out of that is:
why?
I mean, for someone else your parents are the peripheral people, and their parents are central, like
why is it logical that your parents' opinion makes any more difference to you
than the opinion of some randomly selected people who are approximately that age
why is it the case that you would consider that they know more than someone else?
I mean, I know that they know you better, and fair enough, but that's not the point
and then another point there is that to the degree that your parents' opinion about you matters more
than some randomly selected people of approximately the same age, Jung would say, well
you haven't exactly separated out the God-image from your parents, and so you're still under that combination
it's like... it's a complicated thing to talk about, but think about the Harry Potter series
Harry has two sets of parents, right, he's got the Dursley parents, and then he's got these, like, magical parents that sort of float behind
and he should know the difference between them, they shouldn't be one and the same, they're not - for him
it's like, well, you have your parents and you have nature and culture as parents
and you shouldn't be thinking that your parents are nature and culture as well, they shouldn't have final dominion over you
it means that you're not an individual yet if that's the case
Freud said for example that no one could be a man unless his father had died
and Jung said yes, but that death can take place symbolically
ok, so there's that part of the idea, and then another part of the idea is
one of the times in your life when you actually realize that you're an individual
is when you'll go and ask your parents something, and you'll realize they actually don't know any more about
what you should do than you do, and that sucks
and that's partly why people are often willing to maintain a tyrant-slave relationship with their father; it's like
on the one hand you have to be inferior in a relationship like that, you know, you've always got the judge watching you
but on the other hand there's always someone who knows what to do
there's always someone standing between you and the unknown that you can go ask: what should I do?
well, at some point you'll realize that the reason you can't ask that anymore is because they actually don't know any more than you do
and then that's a pain, that is a symbolic death
that's also when you establish a more individual relationship with your parents
it's at that point that you can conceivably start taking care of them instead of the reverse
and that's a time that should come, but you have to let that image of perfection go
and that exposes you
well, that's what happens here, you know, Pinokio goes home
and he wants things to be the way they were
and he wants to stay under the careful care of the benevolent father
but that's no longer possible, he's passed that point, and that's why the father has disappeared
and so, Gepetto has gone off to look for Pinokio, because he also needs a son
but in any case, the house is abandoned
and so then we see inside the house that everything's covered in cobwebs, and everything's gone
and Pinokio and the Cricket sit on the steps and they're very concerned; first of all they wonder where he went
so they're actually concerned that he's gone, but they also don't know what to do, because there's just no going home
and so, you know, that's also the case that once you hit a certain point in your development...
well, it's the same thing we already talked about, the answers that you are looking for are not going to be found in your parents' house
it's as simple as that, now you could artificially maintain your dependency, but, you know
if you do that for too long, things get pretty ugly, so you get pretty stale, and
you know, you're like bread that's been on the shelf for too long
so, now they're wondering what to do, and where he could be
and then something very strange happens, the star shows up again, and it turns into a dove
and the dove flies down and puts a piece of paper bathed in light with gold writing on it in front of the Cricket and the puppet
so what in the world is going on there? well, we know what the star is, we've seen it multiple times, right
it's also the place that the blue fairy came from, but it's this transcendent place, it's this place that occurs sort of as this ultimate ideal
and this time it delivers a message; so what's happening here is that...
Pinokio is fundamentally oriented by the wish that his father made so long ago, right?
and the wish was that he would become a fully functioning individual; and so that's that transcendent place
and Jung would say...
when you orient your vision, different things appear to you in the world
so, and I mean this literally, so, because you can't see everything -
you vision calculates what's necessary, your brain calculates what's necessary for you to see so that you get to the point that you're aiming at
and I don't mean that metaphorically, I mean it literally
things that aren't relevant to what you're seeking, you won't see them
unless they get in your way, and they have to really block your pathway before they will be literally visible
so you orient yourself towards something, and that makes some things visible that wouldn't be visible and makes others invisible that you might have seen
and so when you change your orientation, what manifests itself in the world also changes
now, Pinokio is in despair here, and he asks himself: where could my father have gone?
and so, the question is: what exactly is he asking under those circumstances?
and what he's asking is something like: I had a structure that was orienting me properly in relationship to the world
and as far as it was embodied in my actual father it's now gone
is there any possibility that I can find that again?
and that is what you want, you see, like if you're in a chaotic circumstance, maybe you've escaped, let's say, from a bad relationship
or something like that, and you're out of it, but now you don't know what to do
what you're hoping is that you can get your life back together, right?
that you can put the pieces that have fallen apart back together
and so you're automatically going to generate a fantasy about producing another, let's call it stable state
you're gonna be looking for the spirit that yould enable that state to be generated
'cause really what it is in some sense is your new personality
you're in chaos, you have to become something new in order to get out of chaos, and so you're hoping for that, you're hoping that you'll see it
and so, that's going to make certain things visible to you, that's the proper way of thinking about it
you know, when you get curious about something, maybe you're curious about something and you walk into a bookstore
that curiosity is going to guide you to a certain set of books
the fact that you have a question in mind is going to open your eyes to certain kinds of possibilities
and so if your goal is to reestablish your union with the positive father, let's say
then certain things are gonna appear, and other things aren't, and that's what this represents
the transcendent star is the goal, which is this developmental process
it's capable of, let's say, delivering a message to you; in some sense that's what's happening when you're thinking
you know, because you have a problem you wanna solve, you have somewhere you wanna go with your thoughts
and as a consequence of that information reveals itself to you in the interior landscape
it's a very strange thing; you know, in some sense it feels as though you're producing the thoughts, but
it could equally be said that you're watching the thoughts reveal themselves
and which of those is more accurate is by no means obvious; you can certainly have thoughts that surprise you
which is very strange, it's like,  they're your thoughts. How in the world can they surprise you, but they do
so, it's like you didn't know them before you thought them up and then the question is well where did they come from
if you didn't know them before you thought them up?
Well, they sort of spring out of the void.
That's one way of thinking about it. Anyways...
this is a Holy Ghost symbol, this dove, as well, so that puts some Christian imagery in here again
You could think of it as a manifestation of the spirit of transformation.
That's another way of looking at it. Anyways, it's the conscience that interprets the letter
figuring out what the next thing should be, and weirdly enough, what the letter says is that
Geppetto was out looking for Pinocchio and he got swallowed by a whale
which makes very little sense to put it bluntly
Geppetto went to search for Pinocchio and now he's at the bottom of the sea in a giant whale.
We leap right over that tremendous gap in logic
and follow the story nonetheless. Okay, so what's the idea here?
The idea is that if you fall into a chaotic state and everything falls apart...
there's the possibility that things can come back together
including what you've just learned, in a new state.
And  so you can conceptualize that symbolically as
the existence of the dead father at the bottom of the chaotic landscape
That's the proper way, as far as I can tell, to think about it.
It's like there's something down there that's capable of re-forming and reemerging that's
that incorporates the previous state but that takes it farther.
And you're not going to find that unless you descend into this chaotic place where
it feels like all order is gone.
well, you generate order, it's going to be akin to the order that you had before
but there's going to be something new about it as well, so it's down to the bottom of the chaotic state,
to bring up what you're missing.
And, that's one level of analysis. Another level of analysis you think is well that's also what you're doing
that's what you should be doing, in principle, when you're going to university
You know, you're...you come to university
in roughly the same state as Pinocchio.
You know, you're a bit of a puppet, and you're kind of a jackass, and what the hell do you know?
And it's chaotic because you haven't found your place in the world properly.
And I don't mean merely for career, not that that's not relevant, because it is,
but it's more important than that. It's because you're a historical creature.
Because, you are a product of history, unless you
are encultureated properly, which means you understand
your past, in the sense that the humanities can allow for that, then
you haven't been able to incorporate
the wisdom of your ancestors into your day to day pursuits, and that's going to make you weak,
that's the idea anyways. And so when you come to university,
this is what university is for. It's so that you can go into the chaos,
and you can pull something out of it that's truly of value.
and you can incorporate that in your own personality, and that makes you much, much
stronger, like literally stronger, not more educated, but
not, it's not like you know more facts,
it's that you literally are a better person, and "better" means
you can do far more things. You can articulate your - that's something that's of crucial importance is that
you can articulate yourself properly, which is
more useful than anything else you can possibly manage, like if you guys come out of university
capable of making coherent
arguments, and using language properly,
you're so powerful that it's ridiculous. You always
you can lay out a strategy and pursue it successfully
and maybe the strategy is oriented towards something good, something that will actually work
work for you, and work for other people as well
and I don't really understand why people aren't told this when they come to university, is that
your goal is to make yourself as articulate in writing and thinking and speaking as you possibly can
because that opens the door to everything that you'll wanna do in the future, no matter what it is
the more articulate person always rises, always
because they lay out strategies more effectively, they lay out the reasons for doing something or for not doing something
more particularly; they convince people, and properly so, that they can grapple with potential that lies ahead
effectively; and they can defend themselves when they're challenged
and so, all of that is going into the past, into the chaos of the past, you could even say
and pulling up the spirit that inhabits that from the bottom and uniting with it
and if you don't do that, well, you're defenceless in the case of... in the face of the tragedy of life
and then, that's not so good, because if you're defenceless in the face of the tragedy of life
then you get way more hurt than you would otherwise get, and so will the people around you; and then
the probability that you're gonna be resentful and bitter about that is really high, because
no one likes to fail continually; and then you get bitter and resentful
and then once you're bitter and resentful, well, being vengeful and mean is the next step
it doesn't take much of a transformation to move from that place to the next
so now Pinokio has to face the thing that he's afraid of most
and that's a complicated idea as well; so Jung had this
phrase that he took from the alchemists, which was "in sterqualinas invenetur"
and what it meant was: "what you most wanna find will be found where you least wanna look"
there's this old story that's from King Arthur, and King Arthur has these knights, right
they all sit around the Round Table, which means they're roughly equal, that's what the round table means
and they're off to find the Holy Grail, and the Holy Grail is the most valuable object, that's what it means
so they're off to find the most valuable thing, but they don't know what it is, and they don't know where it is
but they know that there's a most valuable thing, so in osme sense it's akin to them orienting themselves by the star
and they don't know where to look, and so what they decide is
they have the castle and it's in the middle of a forest; so each knight decides to start looking for the Holy Grail
by entering the forest at the point that looks darkest to him
and so what's the idea there?
well, imagine there are things that come easy to you and that you're fond of pursuing
and that you're happy about pursuing; so you've found them and pursued them
and you've mastered them, so you know all that; but then there's another place that you don't wanna go
and so you haven't gone there and you haven't mastered it, and
you're very small in comparison to it, because you haven't mastered it, and so it has this monstrous aspect
...
but if what you're doing isn't working, it's where you haven't gone that you need to go
and so, I can give you another example of this, so let's say
you're an agreeable person, and so you don't like conflict and you won't stand up for yourself
and you regard anger and the proclivity to provoke and to engage in conflict as something that's positively terrible
it's not only that you're not good at it, it's actually that it's wrong
so that's where you have to go if you're gonna learn how to stand up for yourself
and imagine that you're afraid, maybe you have something like agoraphobia
so there's a whole bunch of things that you're afraid of, and you don't wanna go there
but if you wanna put yourself together, then that's exactly where you have to go
and so it's frequently the case that what you wanna find is to be found where you least wanna find it
and that idea's echoed in the prominent stories of dragons and gold
it's exactly the same idea, is that the dragon is this terrible thing, it's this terrible predatory thing that lives forever and is very, very wise
and lives underground, and it'll kill you, it'll burn you up in a second
but it hoards gold; and so you have to go there, into the dragon's lair if you're gonna get the gold
and that's a representation of peoples' paradoxical relationship with reliaty, it's like
you have to go out there and confront it in order to incorporate what it has to offer to you
but the probability that that's going to be intensely dangerous and push you right to the limit...
first of all, those are actually the same thing; if it didn't push you to the limit, you wouldn't gain anything valuable from it
so you don't get one without the other, you don't get the gold without the dragon
that's a very strange, very very strange idea, but it seems to be accurate
so all of that's lurking underneath this in this imagery of the whale
the thing that's at the bottom of... now, the whale, you can think of the story of Jonah
what happens with Jonah is that, roughly speaking, he is a prophet
and God tells him that he has to, if I rmember correctly, God tells him that he has to go to this city, and
straighten it out, because it's veered off the path and it's heading towards doom, and
Jonah thinks: I'm not going to that city to tell those people anything like that, because they're not gonna be very happy
with me just showing up there and telling them, you know, everything they're doing is wrong, and so
he hops on a boat and tries to get out of there, and then God conjures up this huge storm, and the boat is about to be swamped
and the sailors, they're worried, I think, about making the boat lighter, something like that
they all draw lots to see who gets tossed overboard, and Jonah admits that it's actually his fault
because God's upset with him, because he got this direct command to go straighten out this city and he ran off, and so
the sailors throw... they're not happy about this, but they throw Jonah overboard, and the seas calm
and a great fish comes up, a whale, and swallows him, and then he's down in the fish for three days
and it throws him up on the dry land, and then he's learned his lesson by that time, and he goes off to have this...
to pursue his proper destiny; so that's echoed in this story as well
that if you don't follow the pathway that you're supposed to follow
the seas will become stormy for you, and something will come up and pull you down
and you'll be in a terrible place for some length of time, 'till you learn your lesson
and if you're lucky, you'll get spit back up on shore, and then you can go do what you should do
well, I mean that's not a lesson that anybody needs to have interpreted, I think everybody understands that
anyways, the Cricket tells Pinokio what he has to do
and then something kind of paradoxical happens, Pinokio decides he's gonna go do this
and then the Cricket has got this weird, paradoxical response to that; on the one hand he's
he's sort of pulling Pinokio back, saying: look, you know, this is foolhardy
you're gonna go all the way down to the ocean, you're gonna confront this terrible whale, this is really, really dangerous
but at the same time, when Pinokio's on the edge of the cliff, the Cricket helps him tie his tail around a rock
and he holds his finger in place, so that Pinokio can tie the knot, it's like the conscience is conflicted about this
really dangerous and foolhardy, but it's also necessary, and so he plays this dual role
and Pinokio's leading at this point; so into the ocean he goes
I guess partly what this means is that if you're not oriented properly in the world, you should take your...
you should take your doubts and the chaos that you're enveloped in seriously
you should face it and think it through, you should go into it as far as you can go into it
because you'll find something at the bottom of it; the alternative is to pretend that it doesn't exist
so then Pinokio is at the bottom of the water; he can actually breathe down there, it turns out, so
you could think that he's gone into the unknown, he's outside of dry land,
he's in the unconscious, all of those things are true, and
you might think, well, why would it be the world outside of what's known and the unconscious at the same time?
this weird intermingling of those two things; and as far as I can tell, that's because
when you're in chaos and you don't know what's going on, then you start imagining what might be going on
and that imagination is partly the world as it might be
but it's also partly the structure of your unconscious mind, which is producing the fantasies, and so
when you're truly in chaos, then the distinction between your fantasies and reality isn't clear
that's actually what constitutes the chaos; so imagine this, so
you're in a relationship, and the person betrays you
and you knew who they were, at least you thought you did, before that moment
but now you're looking at them and you don't know who they are
and you don't know what the past was, and you don't know what the present is
and you don't know what the future's going to be; all of that's been thrown up into the air in a major way
that's traumatic, so much has fallen apart that it's traumatic
so what do you start to do? you start to imagine what might be the situation
well, then the reality, like, the reality is the reality and your imagination at the same time
they're not pulled apart at all, you cannot distinguish between them, and so
it was a Jungian idea... I could say that's the snitch that Harry Potter's chasing, by the way
I know that's a terrible leap, but that is what it is, it's that weird intermingling of potential and reality that
that can manifest itself as the world if you pursue it, it's roughly that
so Pinokio's in this situation that's half-fantasy and half-reality, in this chaotic state
and he has to go down to find the thing that he least wants to find
and he's hoping that it... he's got this intuition that in facing that thing, that chaos that life really is, that chaos
that he's going to find his father and reunite with him
so you could also say that in some sense it's a decision of faith, i suppose, because
you might ask yourself, well, why bother confronting chaos? if chaos is the ultimate reality, then what the hell use is facing it?
because it's just gonna reveal itself as the ultimate reality and drown you
but the myths always say the same thing, they say: "no, no, if you confront what's really disturbing you
if you really confront it, and you do it voluntarily, you're gonna find order in it eventually"
or at least that's the only way you're gonna find order
now, it's not like these stories are optimistic, and it's not as if they give you a sure guide to success
that's the other thing, it's not like they're unerringly accurate, because
you can be subsumed by chaos that's so total that even if you face it, you're not gonna prevail
I mean, that's why people die, that's one way of looking at it anyways
but the mythology basically says that this is your best bet
if there's a process that's going to work, this is it
and so, and then you might think, well, the better you do it, the better the chances are of success
or the more consistently you do it, the better the chances of success are
and I think that that's a perfectly reasonable way of looking at it
ok, so anyways, Pinokio's down at the bottom of the ocean
and every time he says... he's trying  to find out where Monstro is
and they ask questions to the fish down there, but every time they mention Monstro's name, all the fish disappear
that's like Voldemort, right? he's the guy whose name you cannot say
and Monstro is precisely that, it's the thing that frightens everyone, and so
asking questions down there isn't helping very much, and so Pinokio, what he does is he's calling for his father, and he keeps going deeper and deeper into the depths
and there's a scene where
the darkness of the ocean turns into an even more profound darkness, and that's what Pinokio disappears into
and then we see Monstro, he's in this sort of foggy representation, this huge thing that lies very much at the bottom
and there's no life or anything around him except, I think these are mackerel, but maybe they're tuna
they're animated anyway, so it doesn't matter
but there's no life down there, he's so far down at the bottom of the ocean that there's nothing that's alive down there
so, and then we go inside the whale, which is, of course, abzurd
we see that the whale has eaten a boat at some point in the past, this is one whopping whale
and Gepetto is sitting with the kitten, of all things,
he's also got that litte goldfish bowl full of goldfish with him too, which is quite the feat
anyways, he's sitting there and he knows that he's trapped in the belly of the whale too, and that he can't get out
and so that's an interesting issue, because it's not only Pinokio is lacking his father, which isn't a good thing
but the father is lacking the son, and there's some indication that the father can't get out of the whale without the son
and so it's like the possibility for order is down there in this chaotic state
but unless there's an active agent to go seek it out, it can't pull itself... it's not animated enough to get out by itself
you know, and you could say, well, there's wisdom in the libraries, but it's not going to..
without you going in there and gathering it, and embodying it, all it does is sit there in potential in all of that...
imlicit form, that's a good way of thinking about it
so anyways, Gepetto is feeling pretty hopeless
because he can't figure out any way of getting out of the whale, and he's also starving
he's starving in the belly of the whale
here's a way of thinking about that:
Gepetto's a good guy, but he's old
and that means his way of doing things is no longer fruitful, that's why he's starving
and it's especially not fruitful, 'cause he's missing his son
he's missing the active element that the child represents, say, the playful and transformative element that the child represents
and so, if you get stuck doing something the same old way, at some point it's no longer going to work
even if it was good at some point; it has to be updated
and it's updated by, let's call it the spirit of youth, or the spirit of attention, or the spirit of play, something like that
the willingness to break boundaries and take risks; and Gepetto is very, very skilled, but
but he doesn't have that, and that's symbolized by the loss of his son
that's why he was out looking for his son too, he needs him; and so, they're in despair down there
trying to fish and not getting anything, and so...
Monstro wakes up
a mackerel happens to swim by and Monstro wakes up, and so...
I think they're tuna, actually, they look like tuna to me
and so, Monstro wakes up and he opens his mouth, and a bunch of water starts to come in
and so, and then you see Pinokio with the fish, now...
there's very intense implicit Christian symbolism in this part of the film
and I'm gonna lay it out point by point, so
you may remember and perhaps you don't, and perhaps you don't know, that
one of the symbols for Christ is a fish, ichthys, right?
and that's a play on the Greek representation of Christ's name, buyt there's more to it than that, because
all of Christ's followers are fishermen
and he performs a bunch of miracles with fish; and fish are strange things
because, well, you can pull then up out of the depths, that's part of it
and so they're things that can be pulled out of the depth; and you could say that...
it's going to be very difficult for me to take this apart, but you can say in some sense that Christ is a meta-fish
a fish is something that you can dine on
but a way of being is something that provides you with something to dine on on a continual basis
and so, you might say, well, is it better to have a fish or to be a fisherman?
that's another way of thinking about it, and obviously it's better to be a fisherman, because then you can get more fish
and so, it's one thing to have something, but it's another thing completely to know how to generate good things
and so, if you had any sense, you'd take the latter over the former
even though the former is more instantaneously gratifying and requires less work and responsibility
and so, anyways, the whale opens his mouth and goes chasing these fish
and Pinokio tries... he's trying to get the hell out of there, even though he wants to find the whale
when he actually sees the whale, he leaves
and that's also a very common mythological, umm, what would you call it? plot element
it's very frequently that what happens when the hero first sees the terrible thing, the dragon, say
the terrible thing that he's come to conquer he freezes and gets the hell out of there, because
it's far worse than he thought it was going to be; and so Pinokio is like: no way, man
I'm not going near that whale; and away he swims, and he's actually at the forefront of all the fish, which is quite interesting too
so, in the mean time Monstro has opened his mouth, and the fish are pouring in, and Gepetto is fishing like mad, and he's catching fish
like crazy; and so, the little cat is...
Gepetto is flinging the fish backwards into this, like, box
and the little cat is there, whacking them to kill them while they're flopping around
and so they're pretty excited about this, because... they have a problem, the problem is how to get out of the whale
that's the actual problem; but a nested problem inside that is how not to starve to death
and so, Gepetto's pretty happy that even though he's not getting out of the whale, that he gets to have something to eat
so you could say as well, that he's not exactly focused on the right thing
he's focused on the micro-problem instead of the macro-problem, and that makes him kind of blind
so anyways, the whale swallows up Pinokio, and
Gepetto keeps fishing; and then he snags Pinokio
now this is cool, because... and this is another example of that meta-fish idea
it's like... Gepetto's actually looking not for a fish, he's looking for a way out of the damn whale
and then he catches a bunch of fish, and he's like focused on that like mad
and then he catches Pinokio, and Pinokio represents what would get him out of the whale
but he's so bloody obsessed with the fish tha he doesn't even notice
so he catches Pinokio and flings him into the fish basket
and so, it signifies the blindness of Gepetto's orientation
when he's inside the whale, that's kind of a comment on his aged and insufficient nature
he's solving the wrong... he's solving the problem very well, but it's the wrong problem
so anyways, he fires Pinokio into the fish bin, and
Pinokio says: Father! I'm here; and Gepetto says: Don't bother me right now, Pinokio, I'm busy fishing
well then, that's fine, so then he kinda wakes up, he has this little moment of insight, this little revelation, that
well, he's caught Pinokio, so who cares about the damn fish; so then he runs over to the fish box to grab Pinokio
and instead he grabs a fish, and gives it a kiss
and so that is another way of hammering home the fact that he's...
there's this confusion that he's suffering from
he can't distinguish the local truth from the transcendent truth
and so anyways, he does figure it out; he tosses the fish aside and he grabs Pinokio
they're all thriled to death to see each other, and so they're united
so Pinokio has found his father, but they're still trapped in the belly of the whale; now
Pinokio takes off his hat, he gets covered with a blanket, he takes off his hat, and
he reveals his jackass ears, and so
he's found his father, but he's damaged, and not... Pinokio, he's damaged and not in good shape
he isn't becoming what he was supposed to be; in fact, he's actually degenerated since Gepetto saw him last
and so, he becomes embarrassed, and he says he has a tail
he says: that's nothing, I have a tail too, and then he spins that around kinda laughing
and he brays and gets really embarrassed, and so, that's what you see here, he looks like, well...
he's revealed himself as a jackass to his father
but you know, that's actually a good thing, because...
he is a jackass, and if he was unwilling to admit his insufficiency
he wouldn't have ever gone on this pursuit, so...
it's this perverse willingness to note that he isn't all that he could be
that's part of what drives him to find everything that his father represents
it's a humility, and it's an admission of insufficiency
and you need that before you're going to learn anything, because before you learn anything you have to
admit that there are things that are important that you don't know, and that you're a fool
and maybe that you're a braying jackass
and so, that's why there are injunctions in many religious in many religious writings
that positively portray humility, as the antidote to arrogance
that's the right way of thinking about it, is that humility means: I still have something to learn
I'm insufficient, I still have something to learn
it's exactly the opposite, say of Lampwick's attitude
anyways, Gepetto decides that son puppet who's half-jackass is better than no son at all
which is another indication of his relatively positive orientation towards the world
and they reunite; and then
Pinokio immediately sets his eyes on the main problem, it's like: hey, we're stuck in this whale, we need to get out of here!
and it turns out that Geppetto has already built a raft, but there's a problem, and the problem is that
as Gepetto says... Pinokio says: well, we'll wait for his mouth to open
and Gepetto says: that doesn't work, because when he opens his mouth, Monstro opens his mouth, everything comes in, and nothing goes out
so, raft - fine, but there's no way of using it
and so, Gepetto decides that they're not going to bother with that problem
and they're gonna go have some fish
but Pinokio, his eyes is still on the main prize, he thinks: no way, man, we're getting out of this whale
that's the fundamental think, we're not going to rearrange the deck chairs on the Titanic
we're going to attend to the fact that it's sinking, we're gonna keep our eye on the primary problem
so he's a little more awake by now; so Pinokio says:
we'll make a fire; now that's cool, I think, because
he's down in chaos, where his father is trapped, and the first thing he does is to use fire
and of course that's exactly what people do, right, 'cause we're fire-users; and so
and shaman, for example, are masters of fire; but there's this really primordial element to this story right here, and
it's an indication that the thing that can transform chaos into productive order
is also the same spirit that mastered fire
and so, Pinokio lays that out; and he says: we're gonna build a fire!
and we'll fill him up with smoke!
and Gepetto says: great, smoked fish!
so he's still stuck on this whole fish thing
and so Pinokio runs around gathering up all the spare wood on the boat
including the furniture, which he starts to break; and Gepetto says:
well, what are we going to sit on? you know, while we eat our smoked fish
and Pinokio basically says, politely: you know, enough with the damn fish thing
I'm going to fill the whale with smoke, and that's gonna make him sneeze, and then we can get the hell out of here
and Gepetto says: that's gonna make him mad, it's not a good idea
and, well, I would say that that's the stance of the benevolent state against innovation
you know, even if the innovation is positive, and even if it's transformative and freeing
the old state, even if it's good, it's going to stand in opposition to that
and so that's also something that's very useful to know, because otherwise you can get bitter about that
anyways, Pinokio makes this big fire, Gepetto's pretty worried about it
and he starts to fill the whale up with smoke; and so this is where the whale turns into a fire-breathing dragon
which is quite cool, it's like in Sleeping Beauty, Maleficent turns into a fire-spewing dragon as well
and if you watch the Little Mermaid, that... what's her name? Ursula
she turns into a gigantic snake-like creature as well, although she doesn't exactly spew fire
but the transformation of the ultimate monster into something like a dragon is very, very common
'cause it's the ultimate symbol of the unknown for a variety of reasons that we'll dusciss later
so anyways... yes, it's a symbol of chaos
anyways, and this is quite a horrifying scene; when my son watched, and he watched Pinokio when he was about 4
he watched this scene over, and over, and over; I don't know how many times he watched that movie, but it must've been a hundred times
but he was really fascinated by this scene
and you know, he was like locked on to it, it was frightening, but there was something in it that he was processing and catching (?) on to
so anyways, you see the whale is starting to prepare to sneeze, and he's belching out huge quantities of smoke and fire
and Pinokio and Gepetto and the cat and the goldfish bowl are all on the raft
trying desperately to get out of the whale, which inhales and pulls them back, and then sneezes and pushes them forward
and at some point they actually break free, and there's a 'gates of hell' image there with the whale
belching out smoke like mad and  its jaws open
so they're paddling madly away, to get away from this whale
and the whale is very angry, just as Gepetto suggested
and there's interesting sound effects that go along with this
the whale actually turns into a...
that's what happens when your phone is smarter than you are
the whale actually turns into into something that's like a locomotive
and the sound effects become industrial; so it's this monstrous, machine-like locomotive dragon
that's bent on the destruction of Pinokio
and you could say it's an amalgam of natural and social forces, completely unleashed
everything's unleashed against Pinokio and his father, and so...
they're having a hell of a time, there's big waves, and they end up...
the whale actually abandons them, but before he does that, it nails them with its tail, and blows the raft into smithereens
and so then they'e both in the water, and Gepetto and Pinokio are drowning
and Gepetto actually goes down for the third time, so to speak; and as he's going down, he says to Pinokio:
save yourself, save yourself
and so that's kinda Pinokio's last temptation, because Gepetto's had it, and he could just get to shore on his own
but he would've abandoned his father; and so that's the thing, is...
and that's one of the issues that this movie grapples with, is: what exactly is your responsibility?
and you could say: well, it's to save yourself, but the myth that underlies this says: no it's not, that 's not exactly right
it's to rescue your father from the chatic depths, and integrate with that, and to save both
and that's your duty to your culture; but more than that, it's also your duty to your soul
it isn't gonna work, if you just save yourself, 'cause you're still gonna be a jackass puppet
even though you're gonna be back on shore
so anyways, Pinokio grabs Gepetto and carries him to shore; and the whale shows back up
and gives them one more good wallop; and then we see everybody on shore
and it's peaceful again, Gepetto is in his back on the dry land
and the kitten washes up, and the goldfish bowl washes up, and the cricket washes up, he's been outside the whale all this time
and we see the Cricket calling for Pinokio, and then we see him lying in a pool of water, dead
so he's died
rescuing his father, he died
well, why? well, he is a jackass puppet, and maybe he was supposed to die if he rescued his father
because that insufficiency that characterized him
is something that's descroyed by the process of encountering the chaos
which was so difficult it reforms the personality
and the same occurs when he rescues his father and incorporates that, so it's like...
Bilbo in the first part of the... what is it called? The Lord of the Rings... The Hobbit!
he's this sort of jackass puppet guy, little overprotected Shire-dweller at the beginning
and he goes on this tremendous adventure, and he has to develop the negative parts of his character, he actually has to become a professional thief
and he has to develop his bravery, and... and so the old personality in some sense has to die to give life to the new one
and so...
you see in the Harry Potter series, too, at the very end
Potter dies, and then is resurrected, right, that's...
and that actually happens to a slightly lesser degree in the second movie
where the resurrection is aided by the phoenix tears, after he gets eaten by the... or he gets chomped by that big snake
which is, roughly speaking, the same thing that's happening here
sorry about that
okay, so anyways, Pinokio's dead, that's not good
so, the next scene we see them back at home, and he's lying dead on the bed
and Gepetto and everyone else are mourning his loss
and then we see this magic transformation, and we hear the Blue Fairy's voice
and so, it's like he's pushed himself to his limits, and a natural process kicks back in, and revivifies him
but now he's no longer a jackass puppet, he's actually something that's real
and so then he wakes up and he notices that now, you know, he's undergone this proper transformation
he notices his hands in particular
and then he tells Gepetto, who refuses to even notice; he says: no, no, kid, you're dead, lie down
so, you know, Pinokio convinces him that he's not dead, and then
in celebration they start the clocks again, and so time kicks back in at that point
and so, then they have a big celebration, music happens again, because this is a celebratory moment
and they dance, and the harmony's restored, the good old guy has his son, and so
the house is properly set up, and the old state has its vision, and its capacity for transformation
and the thing that transforms has the stability of the culture behind it, and so - perfect
and then the Cricket goes outside, and he's talking to the Start and the Blue Fairy, and he says that he's pretty happy about how this has gone
and so, then she gives him this little medal
which is made out of gold, and it's a sun, and it's a mandala, all at the same time
and it's made out of gold, and gold is a noble metal, it doesn't mate indiscriminately with other metals
it doesn't tarnish, and so it's a metal that represents the sun; and he flashes his little badge at the Star
establishing a relationship between his function as the proper conscience and his orientation towards the highest good
and that's it there, so he's got this little sun, he's wearing his little sun
so he's also transformed and developed as a consequence of this entire process
no Pinokio's conscience is properly oriented
it's oriented towards the highest value; and then the movie closes
and that's "Pinokio"
so, I'll give you a minute, and I'll take some questions, and try to figure out how to shut my phone up
so does anybody have any questions? yes ->
[student] you seem to have a vaguely psychoanalytic approach to kind of extracting the inarticulated messages
from the mythologies and the stories and religion that's developed over time
so could you almost say that those are kind of constructing this to a societal level out of the individual level
that these are kind of the dreams of the collective unconscious?
[Peterson] sure, that's exactly what they are
they're the fantasies of the collective unconscious, that's one way of looking at it
I mean, they also take a socially determined form
right, because it's animated, and that's a technology, and it's obviously something that exists in a particular time and place
but yeah, they're... it's a collective attempt to give voice to the oldest of behavioral patterns
and so, here's one way of thinking about that
which we'll talk about in some detail, which you should have read about, at least to some degree, already
the question is: where is that knowledge represented?
and Jung would say, well it's part of the collective unconscious, and it's got a biological origin, but
his description of the biological nature of the collective unconscious is quite ambiguous
and I think that that's because it actually is ambiguous, like
for example, we know that primates, and humans in particular, are at least biologically predisposed to be afraid of snakes
so we can learn that very easily; now, you could make a case that it's more than biological predisposition, and that it's actually built in
but I would say the predisposition idea is actually a better one, because you at least need the exposure to the snake to get it going
so that would take place as a consequence of your experience, so it's not purely biological, although
it is the case that snake fear tends to become more intense as you get older, which is not necessarily what you would expect
and the... I just read a paper this week, localizing snake fear in primates, and it was hypothalamic
it's really old, because the hypothalamus is a very old part of the brain, it's older than the amygdala
and the amygdala is involved in snake fear as well, it's really, really old
so you could say, well, you're prepared to develop snake fear, like you're prepared to develop language
and like you're prepared to walk by your biological structure
now, whether that actually  constitutes the contents of your memory, which is what Jung seems to imply
is an open question, but it doesn't really matter, because...
so, one time when I went to visit my nephew, he was running around in a knight suit
he was only about 4 or 5; so he's acting out this mythological pattern, roughly speaking
and you'd say, well, how did he know how to do that, and the answer would be: well, it was represented all around him in the culture
in fragments, and like
kids are pretty good in putting fragments of stories together
that's really what understanding is, is to put fragments into story form
and so, he watched Disney movies and his parents had read him storeis, and he did pretend play with the other kids, and
all of those were like exemplars of this underlying narrative
they're variants of it; and because he can abstract and generalize, he's pulling out the central features of those narratives
the heroic features, and then embodying them; so you could say, well
the central features of these narratives are fragmented and distributed across the entire culture
and so, they don't have to be exactly inside your head, they don't have to be part of your memory
they're distributed in the behavior, and the actions, and the stories of the entire culture
and they just... you can put them together out of that
so, and people do that, that's why they're so hungry for stories like...
well, like this one, or like Star Wars, or like Star Trek, or like the Marvel movies, or like Harry Potter
[student] yeah, what you said about the last scene, your son watching it over and over again
my little brother did the same thing with the last scene of the first Harry Potter movie, the guy with the two faces?
he watched that probably 20 or 30 times
yeah, that's really interesting, watching little kids interact... like those movies are unbelievably complex
I mean, you know, by the time you're your age, and you've seen, you know, several hundred of then at minimum
the impact wears off, but it's really something, sitting down with a four-year-old
who hasn't watched very many movies, and walking through one with them, I mean they're so turned on it's just...
I took my daughter when she was too young, actually... I took her to see "The Mask", the Jim Carrey movie
Jesus, I mean she survived it, I don't think I traumatized her
but she was sitting on my lap, and it was really like gripping a bundle of barbed wire
she was just like that the entire movie, you know
and half way through I thought: well, that's probably a little too much psychophysiological intensity for one small body
you know, but she... those movies, they just have a massive impact on little kids
and they will do exactly that, they'll watch it over and over, and over, and you think: what are they doing exactly?
they're trying to understand, they're gripped by it somehow
right, and it's like they're deeply curious, they know there's something in it
and they're trying to extract out what it is, and they'll repeat it, and repeat it, so...
they're hungry for the information 'cause it's part of rescuing their father from chaos, that's one way of thinking about it
other questions?
well, good enough then, let's call it a day; oh, there is one more question
[student] so, in Maps of Meaning there is the idea that you keep returning to about
when you first encounter the unknown it's like, it's first fearful; and then Jung has the idea of archetypes, so
are there other kinds of meaning that people will find in new information that's already patterned into them?
[Peterson] that's patterned into them or into the new information?
[student] that's patterned into them, like ???, do people actually...?
sure, well, they project the contents of their fantasy onto the unknown thing
and that's partly a process of self-discovery
you know, so, for example, let's say that you, you know, you're gripped by love at first sight or something like that
now, you don't know anything about the person that you're tremendously attracted to
but you'll have fantasies about them
and that fantasy... in fact, your image of them is a fantasy
and if you take that fantasy apart, you'll find out what you value
so you are projecting, you're projecting yourself into the world; and you can discover...
I mean you may also discover something about them, because there may be elements of them that match the ideal quite nicely, if you're fortunate
and if your ideal is, you know, of a reasonable sort
but you can... you definitely encounter yourself if you look at the unknown
because you use your fantasy to structure the contact
you know, and the fundamental structure is:the heroic encounter with the unknown
because that's the pathway... that's the fundamental pathway of human beings, 'cause we're information foragers, fundamentally
[student] so it's that automatic response and the fantasies as well, that are part of the first contact...
[Peterson] sure, sure, well, that's also... yes, absolutely, that's exactly right, yes, so...
I mean, imagine this, imagine that you're attracted to someone, and you're just too terrified to go speak to her
well, what's happening? well, you have a fantasy of a judge
and that's your imagined representation of your own insufficiency in relationship to the ideal
and you project that on this person as a judge, and then you're too paralyzed to even open your mouth around her
very common experience
okay, let's call it a day, we'll see you in a week